Facial Recognition Attendance System Using Python and OpenCv:

This is a project about Facial Recognition-Based Attendance System for Educational Institutions,Employee Offices or for any working jobs.
The main purpose of this project is to build a face recognition-based attendance monitoring system for  to enhance and upgrade the current attendance system 
into more efficient and effective.
The technology working behind will be the face recognition system. 
The human face is one of the natural traits that can uniquely identify an individual. 
Therefore, it is used to trace identity as the possibilities for a face to deviate or being duplicated is low.
In this project, face databases will be created to pump data into the recognizer algorithm.
Then, during the attendance taking session, faces will be compared against the database to seek for identity.
When an individual is identified, it's attendance will be taken down automatically saving necessary information into a excel sheet. 

Research Objectives:

The proposed system will reduce the paperwork where attendance will no longer involve any manual recording. 
The system will also reduce the total time needed to do attendance recording.
The system will acquire individual attendance by means of facial recognition to secure data accuracy of the attendance.

The following are objectives of the project:

To develop a portable Smart Attendance System which is handy and self-powered.
To ensure the speed of the attendance recording process is faster than the previous system which can go as fast as approximately 3 second for each candidate.
Have enough memory space to store the database.
Able to recognize the face of an individual accurately based on the face database.
Allow management to track their candidate's attendance.
Develop a database for the attendance management system.
Provide a user-friendly interface for admins to access the attendance database.


Project Scope:

The main intention of this project is to solve the issues encountered in the old attendance system while reproducing a brand new innovative
smart system that can provide convenience to the institution.
In this project, an application will be developed which is capable of recognising the identity of each individuals and eventually record 
down the data into a database system.
Apart from that, an excel sheet is created which shows the candidate's attendance.


The followings are the project scopes:

The targeted groups of the attendance monitoring system are the candidate's and staff of an that .
The facial recognition process can only be done for 1 person at a time.
An excel sheet is created which contains the student attendance.
The project has to work under a Wi-Fi coverage area or under Ethernet connection, as the system need to 
update the database of the attendance system constantly.
The device on which the application is running is powered up by power bank to improve the portability of the 
application.

System Design:

The design part of the attendance monitoring system is divided into two sections which consist of the hardware and the software part.
Before the software The design part can be developed, the hardware part is first completed to provide a platform for the software to work. 
Before the software part we need to install some libraries for effective working of the application. 
We install OpenCV ,OpenCV-contrib ,face recognition,Numpy and many more through Python.

Libraries Development:

OpenCV -
OpenCV (Open source computer vision) is a library of programming functions mainly aimed at real-time computer vision. 
OpenCV's application areas include:2D and 3D feature toolkits, Egomotion estimation, Facial recognition system ,Gesture recognition,
Human–computer interaction (HCI),Mobile robotics ,Motion understanding, Object identification, Segmentation and recognition,
Stereopsis stereo vision: depth perception from 2 cameras, Structure from motion (SFM), Motion tracking, Augmented reality.

Programming Language: 
Python

NumPy:
NumPy is a package that defines a multi-dimensional array object and associated fast math functions that operate on it. 
It also provides simple routines for linear algebra and fft and sophisticated random-number generation. 
NumPy replaces both Numeric and Numarray.

Two major system flows in the software development : 
The creation of the face database, The process of attendance taking.
Both processes mentioned above are essential because they made up the backbone of the attendance management system. 

Before the attendance management system can work, there are a set of data needed to be inputted into 
the system which essentially consist of the individual's basic information like their faces. 
The first procedure of portrait acquisition can be done by using the Camera to capture the faces of the individual. 

OVERVIEW

The proposed system is a software system which willmark attendance using facial recognition. 
In this project we used OpenCV module integrated with Python which will helps to make the attendance process easy and efficient.
The system comprises of Computer, HD Video Camera and Wi-Fi module or Internet.

Steps of Working: 

Initiate the Attendance.py python script.
Create a folder of the candidate containing images.
Attendance is taken by capturing the faces of the candidate and comparing it with the faces in given folder with their names.
If a face is matched, the responding name with PRESENT status is marked in a EXCEL file with the current date and time.

CONCLUSION:

Before the development of this technology. There were many loopholes in the process of taking attendance 
using the old method which caused many troubles to most of the institutions. 
Therefore, the facial recognition feature embedded in the attendance monitoring system can not only ensure attendance to be taken accurately 
and also eliminated the flaws in the previous system.
By using technology to conquer the defects cannot merely save resources but also reduces human intervention in the whole process 
by handling all the complicated task to the machine.
The only cost to this solution is to have sufficient space in to store all the faces into the database storage. 




